Any very you here, you, thank you for, for coming in front
of the committee today.
We have you here for 10 minutes.
Uh, you may use that time as you wish.
If you want to give us time for questions, you may,
but I'll hand that to you now.
Thank you,
Koto.
Thank you very much for providing me the opportunity
to present to you today.
I have, um, supplied you with a briefing, um, paper,
which I'll talk to briefly,
and I'm happy to answer any questions at the end
of the, um, session.
Um, what, what I'd like to focus on now is, um,
why we need to act now
and what action needs to be, um, put in place.
First of all, the scale of the impact of
endometriosis in New Zealand.
Um, what we know that one in 10 women girls
and there's a fact signed female of both are living, um,
with the condition that is a conservative estimate
currently overseas in Australia.
There's research that states one in seven, so that equates
to a minimum of 120,000 people with a condition.
Um, new studies, uh, are stating
that the economic burden to New Zealand is in the billions.
We're waiting for the publication of a
endo cost study, which is a national burden of illness study
that's been in the pipeline for about five years.
That's due to publication in the next few months.
And it, the numbers are staggering, that it does, um,
definitely states that the cost of the, um,
illness is in the billions to the society in New Zealand.
We are also currently, um, underway
with a research project partnering
with the University of Canterbury.
And within our study we have found that
on average endometriosis patients, um,
have to take eight hours a week off work.
It affects their productivity. So that billions is the cost.
It's not, um, the cost of the healthcare system,
but it's actually productivity issue.
So, um, it really does need to be seen as, as a big issue.
Um, not only does it impact people's, um, ability
to be product productive at work, but it impacts education.
Many young girls, um, go
and attend school all the way throughout the month.
Many we hear constantly of young girls having to, um,
drop out of university
and also has a huge impact on relationships
and quality of life.
So what do we, you, you know, so, um, definitely I feel
that needs to be recognized as a public health issue,
but what, um, what can we do
to change the outcomes of this considerable number of, um,
people in New Zealand with the condition?
Well, there is an existing new guideline
that's been developed in our Australia for Australia
by Rands Cog,
and that is ready to be adapted here in New Zealand.
So, um, rands Cog have endorsed it.
We're encouraging Health New Zealand
to adapt those guidelines.
The guidelines, um, do, um,
require an an investment
and there's quite a lot of changes that will need
to be incurred,
but there will be more of a focus of a
diagnosis through imaging rather than
through an invasive surgery.
If there is the right investment that's put into
ultrasounds training of ultrasounds equipment, making sure
that there's a a solid referral pathway,
this will have a huge change on their,
the trajectory for endometriosis patients.
We currently know in New Zealand,
there's a 10 year diagnostic delay.
Wow. Uh, yeah, that's
because we're waiting for gynecologists to, um,
to conduct a surgery to currently diagnose.
But if we should shift to
an investment in imaging in ultrasounds
and MRIs, um, we will find that, um,
people won't be waiting as long for that di for
that diagnosis, which will have a huge impact on, um,
quality of life
and the things can, um, talking about earlier, um,
what we've been advocating for
as an organization at Endometriosis New Zealand
for the last few years is an endometriosis action plan,
similar to what has been rolled out in a in Australia.
This action plan requires an investment from the government,
and it's a practical mechanism which will, um,
will basically coordinate investment consistent standards
and accountability and equity.
Equity. An action plan would give us the levers
to train primary, primary, um,
caregivers, um, sorry, primary careers at,
at scale expand appropriate diagnosis, resources
and standardized referral and treatment pathways.
And this is absolutely crucial here in New Zealand
to improve the care for the, um, 120,000 people
with the condition.
So what we want, what we're asking for as an organization
is the, is a greater recognition of endometriosis
as a major health issue
that it in impacts productivity quality of life.
We would like to see the adoption
of the Rands co guidelines.
Um, this, um,
just require some investment from health in Health
New Zealand to adapt those
to the New Zealand context, um, context.
And we really want to see the commission resourcing
of a national endometriosis action plan.
So that's it in summary,
but really happy to answer any questions at
Stage. Wonderful. Uh,
thank you.
That was a really good submission
and a really, um, well presented written submission as well.
And there's some clear things that you are calling on, um,
and it makes it easy for us to consider as a government.
I have noted this is a significant issue
and I know people here would've had family members
or themselves being impacted by it,
and it is, uh, it is a massive challenge for those people.
Thank you. Um, Jenny, you have your hand up.
You pushed the wrong button. Sorry about that.
Um, thank you. Can I just ask a quick, quick question
around, um, the, the CT
and MRI scanning, I'm not aware of how
that will be really impactful for those that are suffering.
And in terms of the timeline it takes, takes for diagnosis,
particularly, um, if you've had one operation before
but then years past by
and it sort of builds up again,
how, how will that really help?
So, so current? Yeah.
So currently, um,
endometriosis is diag diagnosed via a laparoscopic surgery.
Yeah, correct. Yeah. So if there's a shift to imaging
and investment in imaging that would start
with an ultrasound
and potentially an MRI, then endometriosis can be diagnosed
before it gets to the point of a surgery.
So therefore, um,
therefore many people are waiting to see, um, gynecologists.
So we know pockets of the country in New Zealand,
for example, in Canterbury,
you cannot see a gynecologist publicly.
Um, you just receive a decline.
So if you can, um, receive a diagnosis through imaging,
then you're not waiting to see
that surgeon for your diagnosis. I've
Got a home. Lisa.
Thank you. And thank you very much Tanya for coming up
and, and talking to us.
You're talking about investment, um,
and who I suppose, uh, following
through from the Rands co um, action or guidelines.
Mm. Is that mainly mainly around imaging?
Um, and I have kind of another question which I'll kind
of just 'cause I appreciate other people are gonna sneak in.
Um, we've talked a lot about diagnosis.
What about treatment options here in New Zealand? Yeah,
Um, we have just worked with Rold to, um,
we've used a tool called the Agree two tool which
compares guidelines.
So we have, um, about a nice five
or six page summary comparing the two.
So I'm really happy to send that through to you
after the meeting so you can go, go through each step
and have a good read of that.
The, the two key components, um, the, the,
the key differences between the two are yes, the diagnosing
through ultrasound
and the need for multidisciplinary treatment.
So not being focused on surgery for treatment,
but looking at a holistic approach to the treatment.
So that includes psychologists, health, physio,
dietician, um, that whole multidisciplinary approach.
So just go into that in, in great detail and
therefore, yes, there'll still need
to be an investment in the treatment as well.
So, um, you'll definitely find it quite beneficial
to look at that, um, comparison between, we've
Got time for one more question, Carlos.
Yes. That, so did
you're not two phased you go
Makes, because you mentioned
that 2020 guideline is outdated,
but also you mentioned that there was included in the
woman's health strategy as well.
Mm. Can I, can I ask whether the,
the women health strategies, what what they mentioned is,
uh, uh, is, is, uh, workable,
but it's just not being well implemented
or what the whole strategy is not fit for purpose.
So the question is do I think that they, the
2023 women's health is Health strategy?
Well, it, um,
it clearly mentioned endometriosis many times throughout the
strategy, throughout the strategy.
We put together quite a, um,
detailed submission feeding into that strategy.
What we've like to see, um, since the development of
that strategy to two years ago is any action.
So what what I'm saying is that we don't,
because you're asking for us to develop a new strategy,
Come through that, Sorry, she, we're almost
Outta time. We're
over time,
Uh, because you're asking for us to,
to develop a new strategies.
But if you say that the 2023 woman health
strategy is, is good enough.
So I think our, our point is we just look, make sure how
to make sure it work as, as a better, better option.
Then just drop the new strategies.
Well, the 2020, the Women's Health Strategy doesn't,
doesn't have any mention of an endometriosis action plan.
So in short, I don't think that's fit for purpose.
It doesn't recognize that. Thank you, Tanya.
Thank you very much for coming and do that. No worries.
Thank you. We good to have you here quick and sharp
or feel free to reach out if
you've got any further questions.
Thanks for your advocacy. Thank you. Thanks. Cheers.
Thanks Tim.
Judy. Hello, how are you? I'm well, thank you.
Welcome to the health committee.
So we've got your written submission here.
We've got you in here today for 10 minutes.
You may talk through that, uh, all that time if you want
or if you wanna leave us time for
questions, that would be fantastic.
I'll, I, would I hand that time over to you?
Lovely. I'd like to know if Dr. Glen Davies is on Zoom.
He should be here also.
Um, he did say he's
been trying to come in, oh, is
His name possibly Zoom?
Yes. Okay. Excellent. May I begin?
You may. I know we're short of time. Te Cocho Couture.
Thank you for the opportunity to present this petition.
As you know, my name is Judy Anderson and Dr. Gp, Dr.
Glen Davies, director of Reversal mz, uh,
will be joining us.
I have no medical training,
but I've watched diabetes destroy my family
health for 30 years.
Diabetes is now officially an epidemic
with almost 350,000 people
registered on the database with Health New Zealand.
Dr. Glen Davies has a patient as young as five
with diabetes number two, not diabetes number one,
which is the norm for that age group.
So my petition request an inquiry into how far two Aura
advised by New Zealand Society for the study of diabetes
recommended injections of GLP one drug liraglutide
for children age 10 to 17 years.
Medisafe says that drug is for persons over 18 only.
That piqued my interest
because I think that's something that deserves investigation
to see drugs in the same class as Wegovy
and Ozempic prescribed to children age 10.
When safe and effective change to lifestyle are proven
to work for obesity
and diabetes, these this method
of putting diabetes into remission needs supervision.
However, it's not effective if metformin
or other medication is begun at the same time.
So algorithms that I see within our medical system,
start them straight away on metformin
or insulin, oh give them lifestyle,
give them green prescription and that doesn't happen.
I've spoken to doctors and chemists
and there's a great area of frustration around that.
In Australia, ophthalmologist James Murkey
sees retinal edema reversed.
That means retinas that have been damaged
and that has always been considered incurable.
Uh, he's reversing that he has received, uh, Australian
of the Year award in 2020 for his work.
He's a very reputable, uh, well recognized doctor
and I've met him recently in Brisbane at a low
carb, uh, convention.
Dr. Davies, who I hope is here. There you are Glen.
Dr. Davies and his team in tpo Mana keynote have documented
269 cases of remission of diabetes,
again through coaching and carbohydrate restriction.
And Dr. Davies will be discussing that soon.
Our current food guidelines need a thorough overhaul.
At present they promote carbohydrate heavily,
cereals, breads, rice, potatoes, uh, 25%
of the perfect diet according to our guidelines.
Then we add starchy vegetables.
Um, all sorts
of other carbohydrates which still break down into sugar are
salads, uh, plantain, tarot.
And so we end up with perhaps 75% of our diet at times
as carbohydrate.
Reducing carbohydrate keeps blood glucose low.
It's a method that was used by doctors a hundred years ago
and somehow it got forgotten.
In the grand scheme of insulin production.
We need to eat as our grandparents did. Far fewer carbs.
Full fat milk, full fat cheese,
butter is healthy, margarine is not.
Seed oils which began life
as engine lubricants are not food.
And we wonder why our metabolic health suffers.
And I must mention the polycystic ovary syndrome comes under
that hitting as well as the endometriosis
that you've just all heard about.
They all come under an umbrella of
metabolic ill health, which is diabetes.
I'm asking the government to revise the food guidelines
because if we don't tell people these
truths, they don't know.
I also would like to see consulted people being scientists,
experts who are not funded by food manufacturers
and pharmaceutical companies
because actually that is a major roadblock
and they have huge influence.
Informed consent is a basic right
under health and disability.
When we don't tell people that they could possibly be cured
through diet, then we are misleading them.
Glen, I think it's time for you to speak, please.
Thank you very much. Um, uh, are you able to hear me?
Yeah, I've got you. Yeah. Fantastic. So my name's Dr.
Glen Davies. I'm coming to you from uh, uh,
in 20 20 0 1, uh, New Zealand GP of the Year
for the work I've been doing in reversing type two diabetes.
I'm just going to speak, um, very briefly for three minutes.
Uh, this has been a very focusing task
'cause I've lived this for the last decade.
So, um, condensing it into three
minutes has been a challenge.
So all I'd like to do is put um, five concepts
or words in front of the committee.
So the first one is metabolic health. So metabolic health.
So this is a topic that's going
to dominate medical discussion over the next decade.
Um, also recently referred to
as cardiovascular kidney metabolic health.
The concept recognizes that obesity, diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, dementia, polycystic ovary syndrome,
endometriosis, these are all the same condition.
They have one cause and
therefore they have one effective treatment.
And 50%
or 49% of general practice consultations are
for metabolic health or with the same cause.
The second word, ultra processed food, ultra processed food.
These are foods that are manufactured. They come in packets.
They generally contain added sugar and seed oils.
They are reconstituted from commodity products
that are high in fructose corn syrup, flour, vegetable oils.
Um, they've been manufactured
to maximize their addictiveness.
The industry calls it bliss point.
They're lower in nutrients, they're low in fiber
and they're high in calories.
So 50%
of a New Zealand child's diet is ultra processed food.
Repeating that 50% of New Zealand
children's diet added, um, age one
to five is ultra processed food.
When you look at a teenager's diet in the United States,
it's 85% of an American's.
Teenager's diet is ultra processed food. This is not food.
It is a food like alternative carbohydrate or carbs.
So we all know that we shouldn't be eat, um,
shouldn't be drinking sugar sweetened beverages or fizzies.
But the pearl of wisdom that is being missed out
of the public health discussion is that all
carbohydrates become blood sugar.
I'll repeat that. All carbs become blood sugar.
So yes, fruit becomes blood sugar,
brown rice becomes blood sugar.
Even your healthy vogels becomes blood sugar.
This is the one that got me.
One serving of rice is 10 teaspoons of sugar
and your banana, 5.7 teaspoons of sugar.
So for reference, you should only have four grams
or less than a teaspoon of sugar of, of, um,
blood sugar at one time.
So increasing it by a factor of 10 with a serving
of rice has got to cause problems.
The most important word or phrase, insulin resistance.
Insulin resistance.
So insulin is the fat storage hormone that responds
to an increase in blood glucose.
Most adults have hyperinsulinemia due
to having too much sugar in their blood.
Too often after about a decade, the body becomes resistant
and to the messages sent by insulin
and the blood sugar rises.
So this is pre-diabetes becoming diabetes
and 89% of US adults, I'll repeat that.
89% of US adults are insulin resistant.
So only 11% of US adults are metabolically well
therapeutic carbohydrate reduction.
This is the solution.
It's the simple way to reduce blood sugar and carbs.
We're running outta time guys, just fyi.
Okay. So what's the responsibility of government?
Um, so there's so many topics
and I think we need to be looking at all of them.
We need to look at direct marketing
of ultra processed food to children.
We need to be looking at changing the food guidelines.
We need to be looking at food labeling
and particularly to look at the Nova system, um,
rather than the industry, um, managed five star system.
Um, we need to debate a sugar tax
and uh, we need to look at reducing the
industry's influence in the debate.
So the final point I want to make is that I have assisted
269 people to reverse their type two diabetes,
and that's estimated to save $3.4 million
and that has cost the government $0 to bring about.
So the return on investment is infinity.
So there is no downsize
and I think that we should be definitely looking at
carbohydrate reduction, uh, in this,
um, entire debate. The end.
Thank you. Look, I think
there's some really good points there.
Thank you for your presentation.
If we could get New Zealanders eating well,
I think we'd be in a lot better position from a health
outcomes perspective as country.
We've got time for a question. Thank
You. Thank you very much. Congratulations
on your award
and for, for your great work.
I do think you're preaching a
little bit to the converted here.
There was a lot of nodding. Um, my question is around
today's mental mental health
or today's health survey, which showed
that one in four young people are exp experiencing
serious mental distress.
Yes. Can you please just quickly tell me, uh, how much of
that you think is correlated to diet?
Huge. The second bit, which I think is going
to be much longer and I'd love it if you could provide the
committee with some perhaps written stuff,
is the social infrastructure needed to be able
to make the changes because you've
been able to work one-on-one.
But being the mother of a child who lives in communities
where that food is prevalent,
I think the social infrastructure is the hard nut to crack.
So leave you with that invitation.
It is a hard nut to crack.
And the biggest hard nut is the one
where our food guidelines tell the public that
what we just talked about is the way they should
eat our food guidelines.
Tell 'em to eat 75% carbohydrate.
We've told Pacific Islanders to stop eating coconuts.
That's a good healthy fat.
And we've put them on to chickpeas
and I 70% of Tongans are obese.
Um, sorry, the other part of your question that I'd like to
Bearing in mind that we have different BMI ratios
for different ethnic groups,
but we won't get into that debate.
Sure. The mental health question,
what's the correlation in your view?
It's enormous. It is total.
Um, you might be able to answer that better, Glenn,
but I have to say I am on a low carbohydrate
diet to test it.
I don't need it. I'm testing it
and my overall mental health wellbeing
was changed quite dramatically.
I just feel calm and able to cope
with anything life throws at me.
I used to be a bit anxious Glen.
So, um, yeah, we're, we are getting quite a lot
of information on the impact
of therapeutic carbohydrate restriction and mental health.
It comes down to mitochondrial, um, efficiency
and the brain has the most
potentially stressed mitochondria.
So we see dramatic improvements, um,
introducing low carbohydrate diets in the majority
of mental health problems, including memory issues,
particularly Alzheimer's.
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, we're at time, but I can see we're three minutes over.
I can see Jenny's got a quick question.
You're muted mate.
Thank you Dr. Davies.
My question is to you, and it relates very similar to
what you've just mentioned, um, the microbiome
and the connection there, not just with mental wellbeing,
but also having a no carb or very low carb diet.
How does that overall impact not just those, um, diseases
that you've mentioned, but um, more broadly, can you?
Yeah, so I suspect we know about 10% of
what we'll eventually know about the role of the microbiome.
Um, one of the concerns with a, um,
a low carbohydrate diet is that it might be low in fiber,
which is the fuel for the mitochondria.
We promoting a high vegetable, um,
intake above ground vegetable intake as part
of this modified low carbohydrate diet.
So that hopefully deals with any
potential concerns about a negative
impact on the microbiome.
Thank you. I thank you both for your presentation.
Uh, really enjoyable.
Thank you very much. Thank.